SoundTouch audio processing library v1.4.0 

SoundTouch library Copyright (c) Olli Parviainen 2002-2009 

1. Introduction 

SoundTouch is an open-source audio processing library that allows changing the 
sound tempo, pitch and playback rate parameters independently from each other, i.e.: 

Sound tempo can be increased or decreased while maintaining the original pitch 

Sound pitch can be increased or decreased while maintaining the original tempo 

Change playback rate that affects both tempo and pitch at the same time 

Choose any combination of tempo/pitch/rate 

1.1 Contact information 

Author email: oparviai 'at' iki.fi 

SoundTouch WWW page: http://www.surina.net/soundtouch 

2. Compiling SoundTouch 

Before compiling, notice that you can choose the sample data format if it's 
desirable to use floating point sample data instead of 16bit integers. See 
section "sample data format" for more information. 

2.1. Building in Microsoft Windows 

Project files for Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 and Visual C++ .NET are supplied with 
the source code package. 

Please notice that SoundTouch library uses processor-specific optimizations for 
Pentium III and AMD processors. Visual Studio .NET and later versions supports 
the required instructions by default, but Visual Studio 6.0 requires a processor 
pack upgrade to be installed in order to support these optimizations. The 
processor pack upgrade can be downloaded from Microsoft site at this URL: 

http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/vstudio/aa718349.aspx 

If the above URL is unavailable or removed, go to http://msdn.microsoft.com and 
perform a search with keywords "processor pack". 

To build the binaries with Visual C++ compiler, either run "make-win.bat" script, 
or open the appropriate project files in source code directories with Visual 
Studio. The final executable will appear under the "SoundTouch\bin" directory. 
If using the Visual Studio IDE instead of the make-win.bat script, directories 
bin and lib may need to be created manually to the SoundTouch package root for 
the final executables. The make-win.bat script creates these directories 
automatically. 

2.2. Building in Gnu platforms 

The SoundTouch library can be compiled in practically any platform supporting 
GNU compiler (GCC) tools. SoundTouch have been tested with gcc version 3.3.4., 
but it shouldn't be very specific about the gcc version. Assembler-level 
performance optimizations for GNU platform are currently available in x86 
platforms only, they are automatically disabled and replaced with standard C 
routines in other processor platforms. 

To build and install the binaries, run the following commands in the SoundTouch/ 
directory: 
./configure  -  
Configures the SoundTouch package for the local environment.  
make         -  
Builds the SoundTouch library & SoundStretch utility.  
make install -  
Installs the SoundTouch & BPM libraries to /usr/local/lib and SoundStretch 
utility to /usr/local/bin. Please notice that 'root' privileges may be required 
to install the binaries to the destination locations.  

NOTE: At the release time the SoundTouch package has been tested to compile in 
GNU/Linux platform. However, in past it's happened that new gcc versions aren't 
necessarily compatible with the assembler setttings used in the optimized 
routines. If you have problems getting the SoundTouch library compiled, try the 
workaround of disabling the optimizations by editing the file "include/STTypes.h" 
and removing the following definition there: 

#define ALLOW_OPTIMIZATIONS 1 

3. About implementation & Usage tips 

3.1. Supported sample data formats 

The sample data format can be chosen between 16bit signed integer and 32bit 
floating point values, the default is 32bit floating point. 

In Windows environment, the sample data format is chosen in file "STTypes.h" by 
choosing one of the following defines: 

#define INTEGER_SAMPLES for 16bit signed integer 

#define FLOAT_SAMPLES for 32bit floating point 

In GNU environment, the floating sample format is used by default, but integer 
sample format can be chosen by giving the following switch to the configure 
script: 

./configure --enable-integer-samples 

The sample data can have either single (mono) or double (stereo) audio channel. 
Stereo data is interleaved so that every other data value is for left channel 
and every second for right channel. Notice that while it'd be possible in theory 
to process stereo sound as two separate mono channels, this isn't recommended 
because processing the channels separately would result in losing the phase 
coherency between the channels, which consequently would ruin the stereo effect. 

Sample rates between 8000-48000H are supported. 

3.2. Processing latency 

The processing and latency constraints of the SoundTouch library are: 

Input/output processing latency for the SoundTouch processor is around 100 ms. 
This is when time-stretching is used. If the rate transposing effect alone is 
used, the latency requirement is much shorter, see section 'About algorithms'. 

Processing CD-quality sound (16bit stereo sound with 44100H sample rate) in real-time 
or faster is possible starting from processors equivalent to Intel Pentium 133Mh 
or better, if using the "quick" processing algorithm. If not using the "quick" 
mode or if floating point sample data are being used, several times more CPU 
power is typically required. 

3.3. About algorithms 

SoundTouch provides three seemingly independent effects: tempo, pitch and 
playback rate control. These three controls are implemented as combination of 
two primary effects, sample rate transposing and time-stretching. 

Sample rate transposing affects both the audio stream duration and pitch. It's 
implemented simply by converting the original audio sample stream to the desired 
duration by interpolating from the original audio samples. In SoundTouch, linear 
interpolation with anti-alias filtering is used. Theoretically a higher-order 
interpolation provide better result than 1st order linear interpolation, but in 
audio application linear interpolation together with anti-alias filtering 
performs subjectively about as well as higher-order filtering would. 

Time-stretching means changing the audio stream duration without affecting it's 
pitch. SoundTouch uses WSOLA-like time-stretching routines that operate in the 
time domain. Compared to sample rate transposing, time-stretching is a much 
heavier operation and also requires a longer processing "window" of sound 
samples used by the processing algorithm, thus increasing the algorithm input/output 
latency. Typical i/o latency for the SoundTouch time-stretch algorithm is around 
100 ms. 

Sample rate transposing and time-stretching are then used together to produce 
the tempo, pitch and rate controls: 

'Tempo' control is implemented purely by time-stretching. 

'Rate' control is implemented purely by sample rate transposing. 

'Pitch' control is implemented as a combination of time-stretching and sample 
rate transposing. For example, to increase pitch the audio stream is first time-stretched 
to longer duration (without affecting pitch) and then transposed back to 
original duration by sample rate transposing, which simultaneously reduces 
duration and increases pitch. The result is original duration but increased 
pitch. 

3.4 Tuning the algorithm parameters 

The time-stretch algorithm has few parameters that can be tuned to optimize 
sound quality for certain application. The current default parameters have been 
chosen by iterative if-then analysis (read: "trial and error") to obtain best 
subjective sound quality in pop/rock music processing, but in applications 
processing different kind of sound the default parameter set may result into a 
sub-optimal result. 

The time-stretch algorithm default parameter values are set by these #defines in 
file "TDStretch.h": 

#define DEFAULT_SEQUENCE_MS     AUTOMATIC
#define DEFAULT_SEEKWINDOW_MS   AUTOMATIC
#define DEFAULT_OVERLAP_MS      12 

These parameters affect to the time-stretch algorithm as follows: 

DEFAULT_SEQUENCE_MS: This is the default length of a single processing sequence 
in milliseconds which determines the how the original sound is chopped in the 
time-stretch algorithm. Larger values mean fewer sequences are used in 
processing. In principle a larger value sounds better when slowing down the 
tempo, but worse when increasing the tempo and vice versa. 

By default, this setting value is calculated automatically according to tempo 
value.

DEFAULT_SEEKWINDOW_MS: The seeking window default length in milliseconds is for 
the algorithm that seeks the best possible overlapping location. This determines 
from how wide a sample "window" the algorithm can use to find an optimal mixing 
location when the sound sequences are to be linked back together. 

The bigger this window setting is, the higher the possibility to find a better 
mixing position becomes, but at the same time large values may cause a "drifting" 
sound artifact because neighboring sequences can be chosen at more uneven 
intervals. If there's a disturbing artifact that sounds as if a constant 
frequency was drifting around, try reducing this setting.

By default, this setting value is calculated automatically according to tempo 
value.

DEFAULT_OVERLAP_MS: Overlap length in milliseconds. When the sound sequences are 
mixed back together to form again a continuous sound stream, this parameter 
defines how much the ends of the consecutive sequences will overlap with each 
other.

This shouldn't be that critical parameter. If you reduce the DEFAULT_SEQUENCE_MS 
setting by a large amount, you might wish to try a smaller value on this. 

Notice that these parameters can also be set during execution time with 
functions "TDStretch::setParameters()" and "SoundTouch::setSetting()". 

The table below summaries how the parameters can be adjusted for different 
applications: 
Parameter name Default value magnitude Larger value affects... Smaller value 
affects... Effect to CPU burden 
SEQUENCE_MS  
Default value is relatively large, chosen for slowing down music tempo Larger 
value is usually better for slowing down tempo. Growing the value decelerates 
the "echoing" artifact when slowing down the tempo. Smaller value might be 
better for speeding up tempo. Reducing the value accelerates the "echoing" 
artifact when slowing down the tempo  Increasing the parameter value reduces 
computation burden 
SEEKWINDOW_MS  
Default value is relatively large, chosen for slowing down music tempo Larger 
value eases finding a good mixing position, but may cause a "drifting" artifact 
Smaller reduce possibility to find a good mixing position, but reduce the "drifting" 
artifact. Increasing the parameter value increases computation burden 
OVERLAP_MS  
Default value is relatively large, chosen to suit with above parameters.  If you 
reduce the "sequence ms" setting, you might wish to try a smaller value. 
Increasing the parameter value increases computation burden 

3.5 Performance Optimizations 

General optimizations: 

The time-stretch routine has a 'quick' mode that substantially speeds up the 
algorithm but may degrade the sound quality by a small amount. This mode is 
activated by calling SoundTouch::setSetting() function with parameter id of 
SETTING_USE_QUICKSEEK and value "1", i.e. 

setSetting(SETTING_USE_QUICKSEEK, 1); 

CPU-specific optimizations: 

Intel MMX optimized routines are used with compatible CPUs when 16bit integer 
sample type is used. MMX optimizations are available both in Win32 and Gnu/x86 
platforms. Compatible processors are Intel PentiumMMX and later; AMD K6-2, 
Athlon and later. 

Intel SSE optimized routines are used with compatible CPUs when floating point 
sample type is used. SSE optimizations are currently implemented for Win32 
platform only. Processors compatible with SSE extension are Intel processors 
starting from Pentium-III, and AMD processors starting from Athlon XP. 

AMD 3DNow! optimized routines are used with compatible CPUs when floating point 
sample type is used, but SSE extension isn't supported . 3DNow! optimizations 
are currently implemented for Win32 platform only. These optimizations are used 
in AMD K6-2 and Athlon (classic) CPU's; better performing SSE routines are used 
with AMD processor starting from Athlon XP. 

3.6 GNU compilation issues 

3.6.1 Required GNU tools 

Bash shell, GNU C++ compiler, libtool, autoconf and automake tools are required 
for compiling the SoundTouch library. These are usually included with the GNU/Linux 
distribution, but if not, install these packages first. For example, in Ubuntu 
Linux these can be acquired and installed with the following command: 

sudo apt-get install automake autoconf libtool build-essential

3.6.2 Problems with configure script or build process 

Incompatibilities between various GNU toolchain versions may cause errors when 
running the "configure" script or building the source codes, if your GNU tool 
versions are not compatible with the versions used for preparing the SoundTouch 
kit. 

To resolve the issue, regenerate the configure scripts with your local tool set 
by running the "./bootstrap" script included in the SoundTouch source code kit. 
After that, run the configure script and make as usually. 

3.6.3 Compiler issues with non-x86 processors 

SoundTouch library works also on non-x86 processors. 

However, in case that you get compiler errors when trying to compile for non-Intel 
processor, edit the file "source\SoundTouch\Makefile.am" and remove the "-msse2" 
flag on the AM_CXXFLAGS line: 

AM_CXXFLAGS=-O3 -fcheck-new -I../../include    # Note: -msse2 flag removed!

After that, run "./bootstrap" script, and then run configure and make again. 

4. SoundStretch audio processing utility 

SoundStretch audio processing utility
Copyright (c) Olli Parviainen 2002-2009 

SoundStretch is a simple command-line application that can change tempo, pitch 
and playback rates of WAV sound files. This program is intended primarily to 
demonstrate how the "SoundTouch" library can be used to process sound in your 
own program, but it can as well be used for processing sound files. 

4.1. SoundStretch Usage Instructions 

SoundStretch Usage syntax: 

soundstretch infilename outfilename [switches] 

Where: 
"infilename"  
Name of the input sound data file (in .WAV audio file format). Give "stdin" as 
filename to use standard input pipe.  
"outfilename"  
Name of the output sound file where the resulting sound is saved (in .WAV audio 
file format). This parameter may be omitted if you don't want to save the output 
(e.g. when only calculating BPM rate with '-bpm' switch). Give "stdout" as 
filename to use standard output pipe. 
 [switches]  
Are one or more control switches. 

Available control switches are: 
-tempo=n   
Change the sound tempo by n percents (n = -95.0 .. +5000.0 %)  
-pitch=n  
Change the sound pitch by n semitones (n = -60.0 .. + 60.0 semitones)  
-rate=n  
Change the sound playback rate by n percents (n = -95.0 .. +5000.0 %)  
-bpm=n  
Detect the Beats-Per-Minute (BPM) rate of the sound and adjust the tempo to meet 
'n' BPMs. When this switch is applied, the "-tempo" switch is ignored. If "=n" 
is omitted, i.e. switch "-bpm" is used alone, then the BPM rate is estimated and 
displayed, but tempo not adjusted according to the BPM value.  
-quick  
Use quicker tempo change algorithm. Gains speed but loses sound quality.  
-naa  
Don't use anti-alias filtering in sample rate transposing. Gains speed but loses 
sound quality.  
-license  
Displays the program license text (LGPL) 

Notes: 

To use standard input/output pipes for processing, give "stdin" and "stdout" as 
input/output filenames correspondingly. The standard input/output pipes will 
still carry the audio data in .wav audio file format. 

The numerical switches allow both integer (e.g. "-tempo=123") and decimal (e.g. 
"-tempo=123.45") numbers. 

The "-naa" and/or "-quick" switches can be used to reduce CPU usage while 
compromising some sound quality 

The BPM detection algorithm works by detecting repeating bass or drum patterns 
at low frequencies of <250Hz. A lower-than-expected BPM figure may be reported 
for music with uneven or complex bass patterns. 

4.2. SoundStretch usage examples 

Example 1 

The following command increases tempo of the sound file "originalfile.wav" by 12.5% 
and stores result to file "destinationfile.wav": 

soundstretch originalfile.wav destinationfile.wav -tempo=12.5 

Example 2 

The following command decreases the sound pitch (key) of the sound file "orig.wav" 
by two semitones and stores the result to file "dest.wav": 

soundstretch orig.wav dest.wav -pitch=-2 

Example 3 

The following command processes the file "orig.wav" by decreasing the sound 
tempo by 25.3% and increasing the sound pitch (key) by 1.5 semitones. Resulting 
.wav audio data is directed to standard output pipe: 

soundstretch orig.wav stdout -tempo=-25.3 -pitch=1.5 

Example 4 

The following command detects the BPM rate of the file "orig.wav" and adjusts 
the tempo to match 100 beats per minute. Result is stored to file "dest.wav": 

soundstretch orig.wav dest.wav -bpm=100 

Example 5 

The following command reads .wav sound data from standard input pipe and 
estimates the BPM rate: 

soundstretch stdin -bpm 

5. Change History 

5.1. SoundTouch library Change History 

1.4.0: 

Improved sound quality by automatic calculation of time stretch algorithm 
processing parameters according to tempo setting 

Moved BPM detection routines from SoundStretch application into SoundTouch 
library 

Bugfixes: Usage of uninitialied variables, GNU build scripts, compiler errors 
due to 'const' keyword mismatch. 

Source code cleanup 

v1.3.1: 

Changed static class declaration to GCC 4.x compiler compatible syntax. 

Enabled MMX/SSE-optimized routines also for GCC compilers. Earlier the MMX/SSE-optimized 
routines were written in compiler-specific inline assembler, now these routines 
are migrated to use compiler intrinsic syntax which allows compiling the same 
MMX/SSE-optimized source code with both Visual C++ and GCC compilers. 

Set floating point as the default sample format and added switch to the GNU 
configure script for selecting the other sample format. 

v1.3.0: 

Fixed tempo routine output duration inaccuracy due to rounding error 

Implemented separate processing routines for integer and floating arithmetic to 
allow improvements to floating point routines (earlier used algorithms mostly 
optimized for integer arithmetic also for floating point samples) 

Fixed a bug that distorts sound if sample rate changes during the sound stream 

Fixed a memory leak that appeared in MMX/SSE/3DNow! optimized routines 

Reduced redundant code pieces in MMX/SSE/3DNow! optimized routines vs. the 
standard C routines. 

MMX routine incompatibility with new gcc compiler versions 

Other miscellaneous bug fixes 

v1.2.1: 

Added automake/autoconf scripts for GNU platforms (in courtesy of David Durham) 

Fixed SCALE overflow bug in rate transposer routine. 

Fixed 64bit address space bugs. 

Created a 'soundtouch' namespace for SAMPLETYPE definitions. 

v1.2.0: 

Added support for 32bit floating point sample data type with SSE/3DNow! 
optimizations for Win32 platform (SSE/3DNow! optimizations currently not 
supported in GCC environment) 

Replaced 'make-gcc' script for GNU environment by master Makefile 

Added time-stretch routine configurability to SoundTouch main class 

Bugfixes 

v1.1.1: 

Moved SoundTouch under lesser GPL license (LGPL). This allows using SoundTouch 
library in programs that aren't released under GPL license. 

Changed MMX routine organiation so that MMX optimized routines are now 
implemented in classes that are derived from the basic classes having the 
standard non-mmx routines. 

MMX routines to support gcc version 3. 

Replaced windows makefiles by script using the .dsw files 

v1.01: 

"mmx_gcc.cpp": Added "using namespace std" and removed "return 0" from a 
function with void return value to fix compiler errors when compiling the 
library in Solaris environment. 

Moved file "FIFOSampleBuffer.h" to "include" directory to allow accessing the 
FIFOSampleBuffer class from external files. 

v1.0: 

Initial release 

5.2. SoundStretch application Change History 

1.4.0: 

Moved BPM detection routines from SoundStretch application into SoundTouch 
library 

Allow using standard input/output pipes as audio processing input/output streams 

v1.3.0: 

Simplified accessing WAV files with floating point sample format. 

v1.2.1: 

Fixed 64bit address space bugs. 

v1.2.0: 

Added support for 32bit floating point sample data type 

Restructured the BPM routines into separate library 

Fixed big-endian conversion bugs in WAV file routines (hopefully :) 

v1.1.1: 

Fixed bugs in WAV file reading & added byte-order conversion for big-endian 
processors. 

Moved SoundStretch source code under 'example' directory to highlight difference 
from SoundTouch stuff. 

Replaced windows makefiles by script using the .dsw files 

Output file name isn't required if output isn't desired (e.g. if using the 
switch '-bpm' in plain format only) 

v1.1: 

Fixed "Release" settings in Microsoft Visual C++ project file (.dsp) 

Added beats-per-minute (BPM) detection routine and command-line switch "-bpm" 

v1.01: 

Initial release 

6. Acknowledgements 

Kudos for these people who have submitted bugfixed since SoundTouch v1.3.1: 

Arthur A 

Richard Ash 

Stanislav Brabec 

Brian Cameron 

Justin Frankel 

Jason Garland 

Takashi Iwai 

Moral greetings to all other contributors as well! 

7. LICENSE 

SoundTouch audio processing library
Copyright (c) Olli Parviainen 

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under 
the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License vesrion 2.1 as published by 
the Free Software Foundation. 

This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY 
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details. 

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along 
with this library; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 
Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA 

